The term Monte Carlo is
often used more broadly for
any estimation method that
relies on repeated
random sampling.
In RL Monte Carlo methods allow
us to estimate values
directly from experience,
from sequences of states,
actions and rewards.
Learning from
experience is striking
because the agent can
accurately estimate
a value function without
prior knowledge of
the environments dynamics.
By the end of this video
you will be able to
understand how Monte Carlo
methods can be
used to estimate value functions
from sampled interaction
and identify problems that can be
solved using Monte Carlo methods.
Earlier we talked about how
reinforcement learning is
connected to dynamic programming.
To use a pure dynamic
programming approach,
the agent needs to know
the environment's
transition probabilities.
In some problems we simply
don't know these probabilities.
Imagine a meteorologist is
trying to predict the weather.
How the weather
changes depends on
a variety of
environmental factors.
We simply don't know
the exact probability
of weather patterns
in the future.
Calculating the transition
probabilities used in
dynamic programming is difficult
even for reasonable tasks.
Think about predicting
the outcome of 12 rolls of dice,
the sheer number
and complexity of
DP calculations makes them
tedious and error-prone both in
terms of coding and
numerical precision.
Here's where Monte Carlo
methods can help.
Let's try to find the average
sum of 12 dice rolls.
Monte Carlo methods don't
exhaustively sweep through
all possible outcomes
like the ones shown here.
In fact, you don't need to
know the probability of
any outcomes to be able to
use Monte Carlo methods.
Instead, Monte Carlo
methods estimate
values by averaging over
a large number of random samples.
Let's roll 12 dice a few
times and see the result.
In this case,
the average is 41.57,
fairly close to
the true average of 42.
In reinforcement learning we
want to learn a value function.
Value functions represent
expected returns.
So a Monte Carlo method for
learning a value function would
first observe multiple
returns from the same state.
Then, it average
those observed returns
to estimate the expected return
from that state.
As the number of
samples increases,
the average tends to get closer
and closer to
the expected return.
The more returns the agent
observes from a state,
the more likely it is that
the sample average is
close to the state value.
These returns can only be
observed at the end
of an episode.
So we will focus on
Monte Carlo methods
for episodic tasks.
Monte Carlo methods in
reinforcement learning
look a bit like bandit methods.
In bandits the value
of an arm is estimated
using the average payoff
sampled by pulling that arm.
Monte Carlo methods consider
policies instead of arms.
The value state S under a given
policy is estimated using
the average return sampled by
following that policy
from S to termination.
Now let's look at
an algorithm for estimating
the state value function
of a policy.
The Monte Carlo
algorithm has to keep
track of multiple
observed returns.
Let's introduce a list and
returns one for each state.
Each list holds the returns
observed from state
S. Then we generate an episode
by following our policy.
For each date in the episode,
we compute the return and
start in the list of returns,
but how can we do
that efficiently?
Suppose the discount factor
is 0.05 and imagine
an episode ending at time step
five where the reward
sequences is 3,
4, 7, 1, and two.
Let's find each return
G_0 to G_5,
starting by writing down
the equation for each return.
Notice that each return
is included in
the equation for the previous
time steps return.
That means we can avoid
duplicating computations by
starting at G_5 and
working our way backwards.
Let's do that now.
The episode ends
at t equal to five
so G_5 equals zero by definition.
G_4 is equal to the reward
at time five plus
Gamma times the return of
five which adds to two.
G_3 is equal to
the reward at time
four plus Gamma times
the return at time four.
The reward at time four
is one and we just
calculated that the return
at time four is two.
Solving the equation
we can see that
the return at time
three is also two.
Continuing on, we can
find the return at time
two is seven plus Gamma times
two which is eight.
Finally, the first two returns,
G_1 and G_0 are eight and seven.
By working backwards from
the terminal time-step,
we can efficiently
compute the returns for
each state encountered
during the episode.
The first return in
just the last rewards.
So we add the last reward
to the list of
returns for S_t minus one.
Then, we set the value
of S_t minus one
to be the average of
returns S_t minus one.
On the previous time
step t minus two,
we calculate the return
as before then added to
the list of returns
for S_t minus two.
Finally we update the value
of S_t minus two.
If we continue this loop
until the end we'll,
have updated the values for
all the states visited
in the current episode.
Then we can repeat
the whole process over
many episodes and eventually
learn a good estimate
for the value function.
You might be wondering
if we can avoid keeping
all the sampled
returns in a list.
In fact, we can.
We can incrementally update
the sample average estimated
using the formula here.
Recall what we discussed using
such incremental updates when
estimating action values
for bandits.
We use the conceptually
simpler sample average in
this module to focus on
the key ideas from Monte Carlo.
After this module, we will
switch to using
the incremental update.
In this video, we
talked about how
Monte Carlo methods learn
directly from interaction.
Notably, they don't need
a model the
environments dynamics.
We also showed
a Monte Carlo algorithm for
learning state values
and episodic problems.